---
title: Parametricity via Cohesion
author: C.B. Aberlé
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{quiver}
---

**Abstract:** Parametricity is a key metatheoretic property of type systems, from which one is able to derive strong uniformity/modularity properties of proofs and programs within these systems. In recent years, various systems of dependent type theory have emerged with the aim of internalizing such parametric reasoning into their internal logic, employing various syntactic and semantic methods and concepts toward this end. This paper presents a first step toward the unification, simplification, and extension of these various methods for internalizing parametricity. Specifically, I argue that there is an essentially modal aspect of parametricity, which is intimately connected with the category-theoretic concept of cohesion.

On this basis, I describe a general categorical semantics for modal parametricity, develop a corresponding framework of axioms (with computational interpretations) in dependent type theory that can be used to internally represent and reason about such parametricity, and show this in practice by implementing these axioms in Agda and using them to verify parametricity properties of Agda programs. In closing, I sketch the outlines of a more general synthetic theory of parametricity, and consider potential applications in domains ranging from homotopy type theory to the analysis of linear programs.

# The past, present & future of parametricity in type theory

Reynolds (1983) began his seminal introduction of the concept of *parametricity* with the declaration that "type structure is a syntactic discipline for enforcing levels of abstraction." In the ensuing decades, this idea of Reynolds' has been overwhelmingly vindicated by the success of type systems in achieving modularity and abstraction in domains ranging from programming to interactive theorem proving. Yet the fate of Reynolds' particular strategy for formalizing this idea in terms of logical relations is rather more ambiguous.

Reynolds' original analysis of parametricity targeted the polymorphic $\lambda$-calculus (aka System F). Intuitively, polymorphic programs in System F cannot inspect the types over which they are defined and so must behave *essentially the same* for all types at which they are instantiated. To make this intuitive idea precise, Reynolds posed an ingenious solution in terms of logical relations, whereby every System F type is equipped with a suitable binary relation on its inhabitants, such that all terms constructible in System F must preserve the relations defined on their component types. On this basis, Reynolds was able to establish many significant properties of the abstraction afforded by System F's type structure, e.g: all closed terms of type $\forall X . X \to X$ are extensionally equivalent to the identity function.

Reynolds' results have been extended to many type systems, programming languages, etc. However, as the complexity and expressivity of these systems increases, so too does the difficulty of defining parametricity relations for their types, and proving that the inhabitants of these types respect their corresponding relations. Moreover, the abstract, mathematical patterns underlying the definitions of such relations have not always been clear. The problem -- from a certain point of view, at any rate -- is that the usual theory of parametricity relations for type systems is "analytic,"" i.e. defined in terms of the particular constructs afforded by those systems, when what would be more desirable is a "synthetic" theory that boils the requirements for parametricity down to a few axioms, such that any type theory satisfying these axioms would necessarily enjoy parametricity and the expected consequences thereof.

For this purpose, a fruitful strategy is to consider ways of *internalizing* parametricity into the internal logic of a dependent type theory. Parametricity proofs are typically conducted in the metatheory of a particular type system, but if that type system is expressive enough to encode mathematical propositions in its types -- as is the case for dependent type theory -- there exists the possibility of instead defining and proving parametricity properties within the system itself. By considering the sorts of constructs a dependent type theory must contain in order to afford such internal parametric reasoning, we may arrive at an axiomatic specification of parametricity itself, as desired.

However, such internalization of parametricity into dependent type theory poses challenges of its own, owing to the fact that internal parametricity may be applied to itself, generating a complex, higher-dimensional structure of relations on types (c.f. Bernardy \& Moulin). Various type theories for internal parametricity have thus been proposed, each posing its own solution to taming this complexity. So far, however, the majority of these type theories have targeted only specific models (usually some appropriately-chosen presheaf categories) rather than an axiomatically-defined *class* of models, and in this sense the analysis of parametricity offered by these type theories remains *analytic,* rather than *synthetic*. This in particular limits any insight into whether and how these appraoches to internal parametricity may be related to one another, generalized, or simplified.

As a first step toward the unification, simplification, and generalization of these approaches to internal parametricity, I propose an analysis of parametricity in terms of the category-theoretic concept of *cohesion*. Cohesion here refers to a particular relation between categories whereby one is equipped with an adjoint string of modalities that together make its objects behave like abstract spaces, whose points are bound together by some sort of *cohesion* that serves to constrain the structure-preserving maps that exist between these spaces. Such a notion of cohesion is suspiciously reminiscent of the informal idea behind Reynolds' formulation of parametricity outlined above, particularly if one interprets the *cohesion* that binds types together as the structure of relations that inhere between them. Moreover, by inspection of the categorical models of extant type theories for internal parametricity, along with classical models of parametricity, one finds that many if not all of these exhibit cohesion, in this sense. The main contribution of this paper is thus to show that this basic setup of cohesion is essentially *all* that is needed to recover classical parametricity results internally in dependent type theory. As both an illustration and verification of this idea, this paper is also a literate Agda document wherein the axioms for and theorems resulting from such parametricity in terms of cohesion have been fully formalized and checked for validity.

```agda
{-# OPTIONS --rewriting --cohesion --flat-split --without-K #-}
module parametricity-via-cohesion where
```

# Cohesion and Parametricity

The notion of *cohesion* as an abstract characterization of when one category (specifically a topos) behaves like a category of spaces defined over the objects of another, is due primarily to Lawvere. The central concept of axiomatic cohesion is an arrangement of four adjoint functors as in the following diagram:

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMixbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhjYWx7RX0iXSxbMCwxLCJcXG1hdGhjYWx7U30iXSxbMCwxLCJcXEdhbW1hIiwxLHsiY3VydmUiOi0xfV0sWzEsMCwiXFxuYWJsYSIsMSx7ImN1cnZlIjozfV0sWzEsMCwiXFxEZWx0YSIsMSx7ImN1cnZlIjotMX1dLFswLDEsIlxcUGkiLDEseyJjdXJ2ZSI6M31dLFs1LDQsIiIsMSx7ImxldmVsIjoxLCJzdHlsZSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiYWRqdW5jdGlvbiJ9fV0sWzQsMiwiIiwxLHsibGV2ZWwiOjEsInN0eWxlIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJhZGp1bmN0aW9uIn19XSxbMiwzLCIiLDEseyJsZXZlbCI6MSwic3R5bGUiOnsibmFtZSI6ImFkanVuY3Rpb24ifX1dXQ== -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMixbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhjYWx7RX0iXSxbMCwxLCJcXG1hdGhjYWx7U30iXSxbMCwxLCJcXEdhbW1hIiwxLHsiY3VydmUiOi0xfV0sWzEsMCwiXFxuYWJsYSIsMSx7ImN1cnZlIjozfV0sWzEsMCwiXFxEZWx0YSIsMSx7ImN1cnZlIjotMX1dLFswLDEsIlxcUGkiLDEseyJjdXJ2ZSI6M31dLFs1LDQsIiIsMSx7ImxldmVsIjoxLCJzdHlsZSI6eyJuYW1lIjoiYWRqdW5jdGlvbiJ9fV0sWzQsMiwiIiwxLHsibGV2ZWwiOjEsInN0eWxlIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJhZGp1bmN0aW9uIn19XSxbMiwzLCIiLDEseyJsZXZlbCI6MSwic3R5bGUiOnsibmFtZSI6ImFkanVuY3Rpb24ifX1dXQ==&embed" width="176" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>

where $\mathcal{E,S}$ are both topoi, $\Delta, \nabla$ are both fully faithful, and $\Pi$ preserves finite products. Given such an arrangement, we think of the objects of $\mathcal{E}$ as *spaces* and those of $\mathcal{S}$ as *sets* (even if $\mathcal{S}$ is not the category of sets), where $\Gamma$ is the functor that sends a space to its set of points, $\Delta$ sends a set to the corresponding *discrete space*, $\nabla$ sends a set to the corresponding *codiscrete space*, and $\Pi$ sends a space to its set of connected components. These in turn induce a string of adjoint modalities on $\mathcal{E}$: $$
\smallint \dashv \flat \dashv \sharp 
$$ where $\smallint = \Delta \circ \Pi$ and $\sharp = \nabla \circ \Gamma$ are idempotent monads, $\flat = \Delta \circ \Gamma$ is an idempotent comonad, and both $\flat$ and $\sharp$ preserve finite limits.

A concrete example of cohesion comes from the category of reflexive graphs $\mathbf{RGph}$, which is cohesive over the category of sets $\mathbf{Set}$. Here, $\Gamma$ is the functor that sends a reflexive graph to its set of vertices, $\Delta$ sends a set $V$ to the "discrete" reflexive graph on $V$ whose only edges are self-loops, $\nabla$ sends $V$ to the "codiscrete" graph where there is a unique edge between any pair of vertices, and $\Pi$ sends a reflexive graph to its set of (weakly) connected components. It is worth noting, at this point, that many classical models of parametricity are based upon semantic interpretations of types as reflexive graphs, and this, I wish to argue is no accident, and the key property of reflexive graphs underlying such interpretations is precisely their cohesive structure. 

Similarly, the category of bicubical sets is cohesive over that of cubical sets, a fact exploited by Nuyts, Devriese & Vezzossi in the semantics for their type theory for parametric quantifiers. 

More generally, for any base topos $\mathcal{S}$, we may construct its corresponding topos $\mathbf{RGph}(\mathcal{S})$ of *internal reflexive graphs*, which will similarly be cohesive over $\mathcal{S}$, so we can in fact use the language of such internal reflexive graphs to derive parametricity results for *any* topos (or indeed, any $\infty$-topos).

Returning to the general setting of abstract cohesion, then, an object $A \in \mathcal{E}$ is called *discrete* if the counit map $\epsilon_A : \flat A \to A \in \mathcal{E}$ is an isomorphism.

# Axioms for Modal Parametricity

# Applications of Modal Parametricity

# Toward a synthetic theory of parametricity